Managed execution and isolation are perhaps the most important advantages of virtualization. In
the case of techniques supporting the creation of virtualized execution environments, these two
characteristics allow building secure and controllable computing environments. A virtual execution
environment can be configured as a sandbox, thus preventing any harmful operation to cross the
borders of the virtual host. Moreover, allocation of resources and their partitioning among different
guests is simplified, being the virtual host controlled by a program. This enables fine-tuning of
resources, which is very important in a server consolidation scenario and is also a requirement for
effective quality of service.

Portability is another advantage of virtualization, especially for execution virtualization techni-
ques. Virtual machine instances are normally represented by one or more files that can be easily
transported with respect to physical systems. Moreover, they also tend to be self-contained since they
do not have other dependencies besides the virtual machine manager for their use. Portability and
self-containment simplify their administration. Java programs are “compiled once and run every-
where”; they only require that the Java virtual machine be installed on the host. The same applies to
hardware-level virtualization. It is in fact possible to build our own operating environment within a
virtual machine instance and bring it with us wherever we go, as though we had our own laptop. This
concept is also an enabler for migration techniques in a server consolidation scenario.

Portability and self-containment also contribute to reducing the costs of maintenance, since the
number of hosts is expected to be lower than the number of virtual machine instances. Since the
guest program is executed in a virtual environment, there is very limited opportunity for the guest
program to damage the underlying hardware. Moreover, it is expected that there will be fewer vir-
tual machine managers with respect to the number of virtual machine instances managed.

Finally, by means of virtualization it is possible to achieve a more efficient use of resources.
Multiple systems can securely coexist and share the resources of the underlying host, without inter-
fering with each other. This is a prerequisite for server consolidation, which allows adjusting the
number of active physical resources dynamically according to the current load of the system, thus
creating the opportunity to save in terms of energy consumption and to be less impacting on the
environment.